New Entry: Java Compiler (#882)
Codecademy/docs: content/java/concepts/compiler/compiler.md

---
Title: 'Compiler'
Description: 'Java Compilers typically take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Command Line'
  - 'Developer Tools'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> Java **compilers** typically take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The JVM does not interpret source code, it interprets something called Java bytecode, which is a language somewhere between human-readable source code, and [machine code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/machine-code) which is specific to a particular computer. The difference between bytecode and machine code is that bytecode is platform independent and the same bytecode can be interpreted by any JVM running on any sort of computer system. This is what makes compiled Java programs portable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java **compilers** are programs that take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The JVM does not interpret source code. Instead, it interprets what is called Java bytecode (a language somewhere between human-readable source code, and [machine code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/machine-code)), which is specific to a particular computer. Unlike machine code, bytecode is platform-neutral and the same bytecode can be interpreted by any JVM running on any sort of computer system. This is what makes compiled Java programs portable.
```

  - 'Developer Tools'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

Java **compilers** are programs that take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The JVM does not interpret source code. Instead, it interprets what is called Java bytecode (a language somewhere between human-readable source code, and [machine code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/machine-code)), which is specific to a particular computer. Unlike machine code, bytecode is platform-neutral and the same bytecode can be interpreted by any JVM running on any sort of computer system. This is what makes compiled Java programs portable.

Most of these compilers do little to no optimization of the code, leaving that task for the JVM to do at run time. The JVM loads the bytecode and either interprets it, or just-in-time compiles it to machine code, and then possibly optimizes it.

## Compiling a Java File

The Java compiler is executed on the command line in [Unix](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unix) or DOS shells as follows:

```shell
javac ProgramName.java
```

> Where `ProgramName` is the name of a given `.java` file. Part of the configuration of Java requires setting up the class path so the Java compiler can find `ProgramName.java` in the filesystem. This can be done by using the `-classpath` option with the `javac` compiler command, or by setting the `CLASSPATH` environment variable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where `ProgramName` is the name of a given `.java` file. Part of the configuration of Java requires setting up the [classpath](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classpath) so the Java compiler can find `ProgramName.java` in the filesystem. This can be done by using the `-classpath` option with the `javac` compiler command, or by setting the `CLASSPATH` environment variable.
```

---
Title: 'Compiler'
Description: 'Java compilers typically take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Command Line'
  - 'Developer Tools'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

Java **compilers** are programs that take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).

> The JVM does not interpret source code. Instead, it interprets what is called Java bytecode (a language somewhere between human-readable source code, and [machine code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/machine-code)), which is specific to a particular computer. Unlike machine code, bytecode is platform-neutral meaning the same bytecode can be interpreted by any JVM running on any sort of computer system. This is what makes compiled Java programs portable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The JVM does not interpret source code (high-level program). Instead, it interprets what is called Java bytecode (a low-level language somewhere between human-readable source code, and [machine code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/machine-code)), which is specific to a particular computer. Unlike machine code, bytecode is platform-neutral meaning the same bytecode can be interpreted by any JVM running on any sort of computer system. This is what makes compiled Java programs portable.
```

Reviewer 3: Between the first and second sentence, can we explain how the compiler converts the source code into the low-level program? The Java byte code is the object file or result of the compiled source code, or something along those lines just to be more explicit about the high-to-low language conversion

Author: It's mentioned in the prior paragraph that the compiler produces the bytecode. I think adding something here would be redundant.

Most of these compilers do little to no optimization of the code, leaving that task for the JVM to do at run time. The JVM loads the bytecode and either interprets it, or just-in-time (JIT) compiles it to machine code, and then possibly optimizes it.

## Compiling a Java File

The Java compiler is executed on the command line in [Unix](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unix) or DOS shells as follows:

```shell

> javac ProgramName.java

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
javac ProgramName.java

Java options ProgramName.java
```

Reviewer 3: referred to: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/tools/windows/javac.html

Since an option is mentioned below, thought it would be useful to include in this shell code block

```

> Where `ProgramName` is the name of a given `.java` file. Part of the configuration of Java requires setting up the classpath so the Java compiler can find `ProgramName.java` in the filesystem. This can be done by using the `-classpath` option with the `javac` compiler command, or by setting the `CLASSPATH` environment variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Where `ProgramName` is the name of a given `.java` file to be compiled. Part of the configuration of Java requires setting up the `CLASSPATH`, so the Java compiler can find `ProgramName.java` in the file system. This can be done by using the `-classpath` option with the `javac` compiler command, or by setting the `CLASSPATH` environment variable.
```

Thinking either file system or `FileSystem` if we wish to refer to the Java class itself.

Author: I'm unclear on exactly what you mean with this comment. Can you elaborate?

Reviewer 3: @SSwiniarski it looks good now! Was just trying to say instead of "filesystem" it should either be file system with a space between or `FileSystem` like the class.

```shell

> export CLASSPATH="Path"

Reviewer 3: Is setting the `CLASSPATH` different on Windows v Unix? If so can we make a  small note about this?

```suggestion
export CLASSPATH=path/to/file
```

Author: I think it's actually the same.

Reviewer 3: @SSwiniarski hmm, I did find some diffs:

Windows: `set CLASSPATH=\path\to\file`, and to check the path, `echo %CLASSPATH%`
Linux/Unix: `export CLASSPATH=/path/to/file`, and to check the path, `echo $CLASSPATH`

---
Title: 'Compiler'

> Description: 'Java compilers typically take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description: 'Java compilers take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).'
```

Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Command Line'
  - 'Developer Tools'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> Java **compilers** are programs that take Java source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java **compilers** are programs that take source code and produce class files containing platform-neutral Java bytecode that can be executed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).
```

> The JVM does not interpret source code (high-level program). Instead, it interprets what is called Java bytecode (a low-level language somewhere between human-readable source code, and [machine code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/machine-code)) which is specific to a particular computer. Unlike machine code, bytecode is platform-neutral meaning the same bytecode can be interpreted by any JVM running on any sort of computer system. This is what makes compiled Java programs portable.
> 
> Most of these compilers do little to no optimization of the code, leaving that task for the JVM to do at run time. The JVM loads the bytecode and either interprets it, or just-in-time (JIT) compiles it to machine code, and then possibly optimizes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than interpret high-level Java source code, the JVM interprets low-level Java bytecode (somewhere between human-readable code and [machine code](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/machine-code)) that is specific to a particular computer. Bytecode is platform-neutral and, therefore, can be interpreted by any JVM running on any computer system. This is what makes compiled Java programs portable.

Most of these compilers do little to no optimization of the code, leaving that task for the JVM to do at run time. The JVM loads the bytecode and either interprets it, or just-in-time (JIT) compiles it to machine code, and then possibly optimizes it.
```

I'm a bit confused by the sentence, "Most of these compilers do little to no optimization of the code, leaving that task for the JVM to do at run time." Which compilers are we referring to? And does "possibly" mean there are edge cases where JVM will not optimize the code? If so, what are 1-2 cases of this?

## Compiling a Java File

> The Java compiler is executed on the command line in [Unix](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unix) or DOS shells as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Java compiler is executed on the [command line](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/terminal) in [Unix](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unix) or DOS shells as follows:
```

> ```shell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```pseudo
```

javac ProgramName.java

javac options ProgramName.java
```

Where `ProgramName` is the name of a given `.java` file to be compiled.

> Part of the configuration of Java requires setting up the `CLASSPATH`, so the Java compiler can find `ProgramName.java` in the file system. This can be done by using the `-classpath` option with the `javac` compiler command, or by setting the `CLASSPATH` environment variable:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Part of the configuration of Java requires setting up the `CLASSPATH`, so the Java compiler can find `ProgramName.java` in the file system. This can be done by using the `-classpath` option with the `javac` compiler command, or by setting the `CLASSPATH` environment variable, shown below.
```

> ```shell
> export CLASSPATH=path/to/file
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Windows:

```shell
set CLASSPATH=\path\to\file
```

Linux or Unix:

```shell
export CLASSPATH=path/to/file
```
```
